TYP: Make array _ShapeType bound and covariant (#26081)
numpy/numpy: doc/release/upcoming_changes/26081.improvement.rst

``ndarray`` shape-type parameter is now covariant and bound to ``tuple[int, ...]``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Static typing for ``ndarray`` is a long-term effort that continues
with this change.  It is a generic type with type parameters for
the shape and the data type.  Previously, the shape type parameter could be
any value.  This change restricts it to a tuple of ints, as one would expect
from using ``ndarray.shape``.  Further, the shape-type parameter has been

> changed from invariant to covariant.  This change also applies to subpytes of
> ``ndarray``, e.g. ``np.ma.MaskedArray``.  See the `typing docs <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#variance-of-generic-types>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changed from invariant to covariant.  This change also applies to the subtypes of
``ndarray``, e.g. ``numpy.ma.MaskedArray``.  See the `typing docs <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#variance-of-generic-types>`_
```

``ndarray`` shape-type parameter is now covariant and bound to ``tuple[int, ...]``
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Static typing for ``ndarray`` is a long-term effort that continues
with this change.  It is a generic type with type parameters for
the shape and the data type.  Previously, the shape type parameter could be
any value.  This change restricts it to a tuple of ints, as one would expect
from using ``ndarray.shape``.  Further, the shape-type parameter has been

> changed from invariant to covariant.  This change also applies to the subpytes

Reviewer: you forgot about the "subpytes" ~pyto~ typo :)

```suggestion
changed from invariant to covariant.  This change also applies to the subtypes
```

Shapes are now covariant
------------------------
When ``ndarray`` was made generic, more details and implementation were
left to future development.  While it was recognized that shape was inherently
a tuple (and thus covariant), development towards ``TypeVarTuple`` does not
yet allow bounds or variance.  This change allows user code to type check in

> functions that attempt to specify the shape parameter:

Reviewer 2: This comment about the type bounds is not quite accurate in the case of `ndarray`. The ndarray class was made generic prior to the development of `TypeVarTuple`, and as such what was effectively a placeholder slot was added for a future shape `TypeVar`. And while type var tuples do not support a bound, type vars *do*:

```diff
- _ShapeType = TypeVar("_ShapeType", covariant=True, bound=Any)
+ _ShapeType = TypeVar("_ShapeType", covariant=True, bound=tuple[int, ...])
```

Another option is to convert the first type var of `ndarray` into a type var tuple, but this has the very drawback that (to the extent of my knowledge) there's no way of representing a tuple with an unknown/arbitrary length (aka array dimensions).

Author: Thank you for the review!

> The `ndarray` class was made generic prior to the development of `TypeVarTuple`

Oh, sorry, I was just going off of git blame vs PEP date, and trying to fill in some context for readers who had heard of `TypeVarTuple` why this PR was moving away from that option:  changing `_ShapeType` to covariant pre-empts a PR changing it to a `TypeVarTuple` until the latter supports variance.  There's also more of my rationale at the end of this comment.  Would the following language work?

```
Static shape typing for `ndarray` is a long-term effort that continues 
with this change.  While shape is a variadic type variable, this change
chooses to keep `TypeVar` rather than `TypeVarTuple`, as the latter
does not yet allow bounds or variance.  This choice allows users
to type check functions that attempt to specify the shape parameter
as a `NewType`:
```

> And while type var tuples do not support a bound, type vars _do_

I'm 99% on board with bounding to `tuple[int, ...]`, as in your code and @jorenham's suggestion.  My only reservation is that I don't know enough about structured array data types.  E.g., in a length-3 structured array with two fields (or a record array of the same), would the shape typevar be `tuple[int, int]`?  Or is the dtype typevar responsible for the field length, meaning the shape typevar is `tuple[int]`?  Because I don't know, I limited this PR just towards variance, not bounds.  But if it's desired, I'm more than happy to add the bound.

> Another option is to convert the first type var of ``ndarray`` into a type var tuple, but this has the very drawback that (to the extent of my knowledge) there's no way of representing a tuple with an unknown/arbitrary length (aka array dimensions).

I thought `TypeVarTuple`s are always arbitrary length before they're narrowed/resolved?  But by gut feeling alone, `TypeVarTuple` seem less useful than `TypeVar("Shape", bound=tuple[int, ...])` until more of the TBDs from PEP 646 are resolved (e.g. [manipulating individual types][1] and [shape arithmetic][2]), especially because `Tuple` now also supports unpacking types.  I also prefer the behavior of `tuple` to `TypeVarTuple` when dealing with [unknown type parameters][3].  That is, I prefer type checking to show more shape errors, even if it requires peppering my code with `cast`.

[1]: https://peps.python.org/pep-0646/#overloads-for-accessing-individual-types
[2]: https://peps.python.org/pep-0646/#shape-arithmetic
[3]: https://peps.python.org/pep-0646/#unspecified-type-parameters-tuple-vs-typevartuple

.. code::

   from typing import NewType, Any
   import numpy as np

   Time = NewType("Time", int)
   Series = NewType("Series", int)

>    arr: np.ndarray[tuple[Time, Series], Any] = np.arange(4.0).reshape((2, 2))

Reviewer 2: I'd strongly prefer to add another type alias for shaped arrays to the `numpy.typing` namespace instead. Using plain `np.ndarray` as a type annotation (over `npt.NDArray`) is generally ill-advised due to the former's complexity, if it can be avoided that is. Something like a `ShapedArray` would be ideal. _i.e._ a type alias representing an array with a given shape *and* dtype; the docs should explicitly recommend `npt.NDArray` usage if the shape is unknown/arbitrary.

Note that prior to Python 3.11 people would have to make sure during runtime to either use `if TYPE_CHECKING:` blocks and/or `from __future__ import annotations` due to a lack of `TypeVarTuple` support. This caveat is perfectly acceptable though in my opinion.

```python
_ShapeType = TypeVarTuple("_ShapeType")
_ScalarType_co = TypeVar("_ScalarType_co", bound=generic, covariant=True)

if TYPE_CHECKING or sys.version_info >= (3, 11):
    ShapedArray = ndarray[tuple[*_ShapeType], dtype[_ScalarType_co]]
else:
    ShapedArray = ndarray[Any, dtype[_ScalarType_co]]
```

Reviewer: @BvB93 I proposed exactly solution a couple of days ago https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16544#issuecomment-2005169857. Great minds really do think alike, eh 😉 ?

Author: Happy to add an alias!  My only consideration is whether the alias should expect grouping dimensions, e.g.:
```python
FloatArray2D = npt.ShapedArray[tuple[int, int], np.float64]
```
I slightly agree with @vnmabus's [comment](1): "I think it [requiring dimensions to be grouped] would make it more consistent with functions and classes that need to take more than one shape".  That said, I'll defer to you if you want the flatter version of `ShapedArray`?

[1]: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/16544#issuecomment-2006220209

Reviewer: I don't think it should.

In my experience, it is very annoying to have to deal with long typing annotations. In this case, it is a differnce of 7 characters; close to 10% of the commonly 80 or 79 character width limit. To illustrate:

```python
npt.ShapedArray[tuple[int, int], np.float64]
npt.ShapedArray[int, int, np.float64]
```

If you still want to use "group" the shape types, then there's always  `np.ndarray[tuple[int, int], np.dtype[np.float64]]` to fall back to.

Reviewer: But for the sake of readability, it might help to place the shapes *after* the dtype, e.g.

```python
type VectorF8[I: int] = npt.ShapedArray[np.float64, I]
type MatrixF8[I: int, J: int] = npt.ShapedArray[np.float64, I, J]
type CuboidF8[I: int, J: int, K: int] = npt.ShapedArray[np.float64, I, J, K]
```

I realize that this doesn't match the order of the `dtype` and `shape` arguments in e.g. `np.array`, but it might be more intuitive this way, since those used to `npt.NDArray` have it in their muscle memory to always start with the dtype. 

Furthermore, Python users are used to always having the `*args` after any positional arguments. So doing something different with the `*Shape` type parameter could be confusing.

Reviewer: On a related note; what about naming it `Array` instead of `ShapedArray`?

Author: I think there's going to be a lot of opinions on variadic shape vs tuple shape and shape first vs dtype first.  Here's the pros/cons I've thought through so far:

#### variadic shape, dtype first:
* Follows example in PEP 646
* Similar to `foo(arg1, *args)`
  * People using `NDArray` are used to dtype first
* Shorter
#### tuple shape, dtype last:
* Similar to funcs like `np.ones(shape: tuple[int, ...], dtype: dtype)`
  * People who haven't used static typing are used to this order
* Same as `ndarray` typing
  * People who've already been static shape typing have to use this syntax
 
Polled my office and people unanimously supported the second.

**variadic shape, dtype last** seems like a decent compromise, and it's what I'll commit. I'm happy to sit on the PR and change it back if a better consensus is desired, but I've overthought myself to a point of analysis paralysis.  I've coded all these options up, hopped back and forth, and test-drove them in a few use cases (and they all seem to work fine)

> On a related note; how about naming it Array instead of ShapedArray?

Haha yeah good point.  ~thefacebook.com~ facebook.com :smile:

Author: Also a neat lesson learned here: 
```python
TupType = TypeVar("TupType", covariant=True, bound=tuple[int, ...])
TypeTup = TypeVarTuple("TypeTup")

class Foo[TupType]: ...
Bar = Foo[tuple[*TypeTup]]

def myfunc(a: Bar): ...
```
^ an effective way of enforcing type variance and bounds on a `TypeVarTuple`.  Combines (some of) the advantages of both.

Author: Actually, the unpacking restrictions on `tuple[int, ...]` mean that the third option isn't usable for certain functions, e.g. `def add_one_dimension(arr: Array[*Ts, Any]) -> Array[int, *Ts, Any]`

Reviewer: It might help to return e.g. `Array[Any, *Ts, np.float64]`, instead of `Array[int, *Ts, np.float64]`. I'm not sure why, but `Any` results in covariant behaviour, whereas `int`  doesn't.

I agree that it would be better if you could `TypeVarTuple` as `covariant=True`, and `bound=int`, but unfortunately that's not implemented at the moment (for no valid reason whatsoever IMHO).

Reviewer 2: > variadic shape, dtype last seems like a decent compromise, and it's what I'll commit. I'm happy to sit on the PR and change it back if a better consensus is desired, but I've overthought myself to a point of analysis paralysis. I've coded all these options up, hopped back and forth, and test-drove them in a few use cases (and they all seem to work fine)

I'm personally in favor of this approach, yes. The main goal of this type alias is to provide a _convenient_ alias for the end-user that's less verbose than the full syntax, providing syntactic sugar for turning something like `np.ndarray[tuple[int, int], np.dtype[np.float64]` into a more manageable `npt.Array[int, int, np.float64]`. 

Are there edge cases wherein this alias cannot be used? As you have noted previously: yes, yes there are. Is this a problem? No, not as long as it's usable in the majority of cases; in all others one can always fall back to plain` np.ndarray` usage (something which holds as well for `npt.NDArray`).

> ``ndarray`` Shapes are now covariant and bound

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ndarray`` shape-type parameter is now covariant and bound to ``tuple[int, ...]``
```

---------------------------------------------------------------
Static typing for ``ndarray`` is a long-term effort that continues 
with this change.  Arrays are a generic type, parameterized by both 
shape and data type.  The previous shape-type placeholder could previously be assigned
any value.  This change restricts it to a tuple of ints, as one would expect
from using ``ndarray.shape``.  However, this change also allows parameterizing
shape by a tuple of ``int`` subtypes, which are reflected in the type of
``ndarray.shape``, and allows functions to statically manipulate axes:

.. code::

   from typing import Any, NewType, TypeVar
   import numpy as np

   Time = NewType("Time", int)
   Series = NewType("Series", int)
   DType = TypeVar("DType", bound=np.dtype)
   Ax1 = TypeVar("Ax1", bound=int)
   Ax2 = TypeVar("Ax2", bound=int)

>    arr: np.ndarray[tuple[Time, Series], Any] = np.arange(4.0).reshape((2, 2))

Author: If I understand correctly, type declarations are valid so long as they narrow the inferred type.  Since no array creation routines infer the `_ShapeType` from it's arguments,
```
arr: np.ndarray[tuple[Time, Series], Any] = np.arange(4.0).reshape((2, 2))
```
is valid, as is 
```
arr: np.ndarray[tuple[Literal[2], Literal[2]], Any] = np.arange(4.0).reshape((2, 2))
```
because they both narrow the inferred type `ndarray[Any, dtype[floating[Any]]` and obey the type bounds for shape and dtype.  I agree that they can't be combined, as `Literal[Time(2)]` isn't valid.  It's an either or: you can use literal length axes, or you can use `NewType` to say that the axes mean something specific (e.g `Time`, `Series`).  Functions that require one will reject an array declared as the other unless it is later `cast`.

For me, the original point of the PR/covariance was to use `NewType`, as `int` is rarely going to have any true subclasses.  [The example in PEP 646](https://peps.python.org/pep-0646/#motivation) is pretty close to my use case: a library that handles images and videos, and the need for type checking to handle the difference between a gray movie (with axes height, width, frame) from an RGB image (with axes height, width, channel).  E.g. a function `lower_resolution()` should persist its input type and could apply to both, but a function `convert_gray()` that averages the last axis should only accept an RGB image (or RGB movie).

But I agree with your next comment, that an in-depth example is better in the `numpy.typing` docs, rather than release notes.  How about I shrink this example to just show declarations of `int`, `Literal` and `NewType`?

>    arr: np.ndarray[tuple[Time, Series], Any] = np.arange(4.0).reshape((2, 2))

Reviewer: > For me, the original point of the PR/covariance was to use NewType, as int is rarely going to have any true subclasses.

`Literal[N: int]` is a subtype of `int`, and it has many use-caaes, e.g.

```python
type ColumnVector[N: int, T: number[Any]] = ndarray[tuple[Literal[1], N], dtype[T]]
type RotationMatrix[ND: Literal[2, 3], T: floating[Any]] = ndarray[tuple[ND, ND], dtype[T]]
type ImageRGB[W: int, H: int] = ndarray[tuple[H, W, Literal[3]], dtype[uint8]]
```

But that's not all that this PR solves.
NumPy has many examples of functions to accept arrays with either 1 or 2 dimensions,
e.g.:

```python
def f(x: ndarray[tuple[int] | tuple[int, int], dtype[Any]): ...
```

But currently you can't pass `np.ndarray[tuple[int], np.dtype[Any]]`.
If you try do do so, then Pyright reports:

```
Argument of type "ndarray[tuple[int], dtype[Any]]" cannot be assigned to parameter "x" of type "ndarray[tuple[int] | tuple[int, int], dtype[Any]]" in function "g"
  "ndarray[tuple[int], dtype[Any]]" is incompatible with "ndarray[tuple[int] | tuple[int, int], dtype[Any]]"
    Type parameter "_ShapeType@ndarray" is invariant, but "tuple[int]" is not the same as "tuple[int] | tuple[int, int]"
```

This is actually the reason why shape-typing in NumPy is practically impossible at the moment.

---

To my knowledge, there aren't any other issues about these problems specifically.
The way I see it, is that this change allows us to start adding shape-type annotations within NumPy, so this is not a new feature or a bugfix.

Also note that all numpy array constructors currently return `Any` for the shape, and shape-types are almost never used in general.
So unless users currently explicitly `cast` an array to have shape-types, or use a custom shape-typed array constructor or something, this change just isn't *directly* relevant for them.

So I don't think an example is needed.
This is not a feature and not a bugfix; this opens the road to the long-awaited shape-typing of arrays 🎉.

So I don't think an example is really necessary here.
Plus, showing an example of shape-typing in the release notes, even though there's almost no support for it in numpy, is bound to confuse a lot of people.

``ndarray`` Shapes are now covariant and bound
---------------------------------------------------------------
Static shape typing for ``ndarray`` is a long-term effort that continues 

> with this change.  Array shape can be described with a tuple of ints, but

Reviewer: Isn't this the first explicit implementation of shape typing?

both ``TypeVar`` and ``TypeVarTuple`` provide some useful functionality.
The former allows bounds and type variance, whereas the latter allows
unpacking.  ``ndarray`` is built with a ``TypeVar``, and this change

> provides the appropriate bounds and variance.  It allows users

Reviewer: `TypeVar` and `TypeVarTuple` are implementation details, as they won't be needed anymore once support for python versions below 3.12 has been dropped.
I believe that the implementation-agnistic terms *type parameter* and *variadic type parameters* are better suited here.

Author: Good point.  I was trying to include too much of the PR/development thought process in the release notes, but rereading this a week later it seems forced.  I'll take another go at it.

``ndarray`` Shapes are now covariant and bound
---------------------------------------------------------------
Static typing for ``ndarray`` is a long-term effort that continues 
with this change.  Arrays are a generic type, parameterized by both 

> shape and data type.  The shape parameter could previously be assigned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
shape and data type.  The previous shape-type placeholder could previously be assigned
```
Would emphasis here that previously we were truly dealing with a placeholder type slot.
